---
title: "A mean correction for improved phase-averaging accuracy in oscillatory, multiscale, differential equations"
collection: publications
category: preprints
permalink: /publication/2024-04-05_paper_two
excerpt: 'This paper investigates improving the accuracy of the phase-averaged timestepping method. Phase-averaging reduces numerical stiffness to enable large, accurate, timesteps in oscillatory PDEs. However, this introduces an averaging error, which we aim to offset with an additional mean correction term. This new method is shown to enable accuracy improvements in three numerical tests, including the one-dimensional rotating shallow water equations.'
date: 2024-04-05
venue: 'Preprint'
paperurl: 'https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.03964'
citation: 'Your Name, You. (2010). &quot;Paper Title Number 2.&quot; <i>Journal 1</i>. 1(2).'
---

Abstract:

This paper introduces a new algorithm to improve the accuracy of numerical phase-averaging in oscillatory, multiscale, differential equations. Phase-averaging is a technique that applies averaging to a mapped variable to remove highly oscillatory linear terms from the differential equation. This retains the main contribution of fast oscillations on the low frequencies without needing to resolve the rapid oscillations themselves. However, this comes at the cost of an averaging error, which we aim to offset with a modified mapping. The new mapping includes a mean correction which encodes an average measure of the nonlinear interactions. This mapping was introduced in Tao (2019) for weak nonlinearity and relied on classical time averaging. Our algorithm extends this work to the case where 1) the nonlinearity is not weak but the linear oscillations are fast and 2) finite averaging windows are applied via a smooth kernel, which has the advantage of retaining low frequencies whilst still eliminating the fastest oscillations. We show that the new algorithm reduces phase errors in the mapped variable for the swinging spring ODE. We also demonstrate accuracy improvements compared to standard phase-averaging in numerical experiments with the one-dimensional Rotating Shallow Water Equations, a useful test case for weather and climate applications. As the mean correction term can be computed in parallel, this new mapping has potential as a more accurate, yet still computationally cheap, coarse propagator for the oscillatory parareal method.
